So I know who you are. Yes. But for the sake of record, can you tell me what is your name
and where were you born? Right, my name is Bhuanesh Napao and I was born in the lovely
island of Mauritius. What part of Mauritius? I was born in a town called Florial and Florial
is one of the rainiest part of Mauritius. Mauritius is a volcanic island so where we
live in Florial there's a tourist destination where you can actually see a volcanic hole.
So tell me about growing up in Florial. Is that how you pronounce it? Florial. It's like
butter but it's not. Oh yes it is isn't it? I never thought of that. So what was it like?
What do you remember? When I ask these questions feel free to give as much or as little detail
as you want. It's up to you and the purpose of those questions is just to help us try and
recollect things. We probably don't talk about much anymore. So yeah what was it like growing
up in Florial for you? For me it was a lovely experience, probably my best experience really.
I grew up with my grandparents in sugar cane fields and there were cows, there was chickens,
there was hens and then obviously having to come to London with all its buildings was a bit of a
shock. But growing up in Mauritius I really liked it. I remember my grandparents, it was like a barn
it seemed like from childhood because I came to this country when I was seven,
like the cows were behind us and we were sort of like sleeping like in a barn house. It had beds
in there so I really liked the smell of the cows and the cow dung because that's what I grew up with
so that was really nice. The reason why my grandparents looked after me because I had
one older brother and two older sister and one younger than me. So they came to this country
obviously to make a better living. I think I was about two when I was left with my grandparents
so they brought my brother over first, then my two sisters so we stayed with my
grandparents. But I just remember you know how free it was, having my little dress and running
barefooted you know and having all the nature, coconut and mango trees and all these lovely
things around you in the sea and seeing my grandad cutting down sugarcane, that was nice
and obviously eating the sugarcane, I loved it. Going to sugarcane factory and getting you know
everything was about sugarcane. So that was really nice and I remember my grandmother,
she's the one that tended the cows so she would be milking the cows and would be drinking fresh
milk. When you come to this country and you drink the milk you think what am I drinking?
Because the milk was so fresh so we'd have cow's curd milk, cheese you know and I remember she
used to walk the cows probably maybe to sell the milk or maybe sell the cow, I don't know where it
was but yeah that was nice just you know having my grandad sort of picking us up and giving us
milk and fresh eggs, fresh vegetables that were grown so yeah so I really miss all that.
So what age did you leave? So I came here, I should leave at the age of seven
and I remember you know everybody coming, they did show us pictures of my parents,
said this is your mom, this is your dad, you're going to go to London and I remember on the day
we were leaving I said I don't want to go and I ran into the sugarcane fields and they had to come
looking for me. I thought well where am I going, why are they taking me away from this place or the
people I love you know. Yeah and then when I did leave my parents came to meet us and I remember
you know she gave this apple and the apple looked huge and I thought I've never seen a huge apple,
like it was a big red apple and we were eating it on the coach and I was looking out of the window
and the sky was grey, the building was grey, I couldn't see any palm trees, I couldn't see any
greenery so it was a bit of a shock for me but then when I did go to my parents house they
lived behind them, it wasn't like a railway station like the, I felt like the railway children
because they always had the train running across and we used to wave at the people but that's a,
it's no longer a railway, it's now become like a nature reserve so it was nice to see some trees
at the back of the house so that was nice. So what do you remember of your childhood that
became a fond deep memory for you, how did you play, you know what things do you
talk about in terms of your childhood still to today? I think I always go back to Mauritius
actually because those were the fondest of my memories, like you know writing on slate
with in our pen and paper so my grandad had a shop as well so we wrote on slate in school and
I remember sitting in school and outside were banana trees and if I'd got bored I'd look out
and I remember one day it was really raining and I'm watching monkeys eating bananas, you know
I think nature is really fun for me, this is why what I do today is try and get people into nature
for them to promote their mental health and their well-being because I grew up in nature
and I miss that and that's what I always strive to look for but in coming to London you know
that was nice as well because I was reunited with the family, I was with my mom, I was with my dad
getting to know them and you know he was quite strict so from my grandparents is very fond and
loving and that freedom and then suddenly you can't run around the house, the ceiling is going to
fall down you know all that sort of thing we're jumping on the bed you can't jump on the bed
you know and it was because we were on a high rise and one day the ceiling did fall
you know because the way the houses are built so it's always sort of like
you know thinking something's going to break or whatever
so yeah it was nice we used to sort of play rounders in the garden
so this is in the UK yeah so you had a garden yeah we had a garden
that was nice and again have to be careful when we're playing rounders and things you know
we'd be told oh you've stepped on the flowers you stepped on this thing your ball's gone on the
vegetables or as in Mauritius you know we didn't have that we just sort of like just run freely
so do you have family traditions or celebrations that you continued at the young age yeah
yeah I remember Diwali because Diwali is like Christmas everything's lit up everybody put
lights we have these diva lamps that we just made out of clay pots and everybody puts that
outside their doorstep and rows and rows of them and I remember having another culture shop
when it was Diwali in London I was looking out the window like a little lost child and I was
thinking why is it so dark where's all the diva lamps where is it and it's only that I'm slowly
accustomed to the culture and thinking oh they don't do it here so you do you know we do we do
have all these culture which isn't the same when you come to London so you're always trying to
gravitate towards cultural groups or go into a temple or a religious place where you can meet
other people of your own background so what how old were you when you arrived in London I was seven
yeah so it was a bit of a shock to see them seven is a unique age because the sevens like that
we are not really a teenager yeah still a child you've not formed all your friendships yet
yeah so you've probably seemed a bit alien yeah yeah okay so could you tell me about maybe um
what the household was like as you grew up like you know you talked about the roof caving in
don't have to go into that detail but I mean what was like yeah what was home like what was
living with family it was nice you know we had um always you know my mum would always cook meals
and we'd all sit around the table we always looked forward to that
I always liked sitting next to my dad you know we had this bench so I'd sit next to him but I
remember one day I didn't want to eat and he would say you've got to eat you've got to eat and he's
forcing you to eat and I sort of like think I really don't want to eat you know um so you know
they were very caring very loving they wanted the best for us um my mum she was a seamstress
she used to go to a greek factory and make dresses so that was nice because we always
had pretty dresses to wear so I like that my dad was a jeweler and we'd watch him melt gold at home
and we had a fireplace so that was really nice to be by the fire melt the gold and watch him make
the gold so while he was working at home he used to educate us he used to do our maths and our
english and um you know and he'd get really strict if you didn't get it right and I used to
get scared then I think oh I don't like education because he's sort of um making us read making us
do our maths and sometimes if I didn't want to do the work he was giving us I'd say oh the teachers
has given us homework I've got homework to do um I didn't like it then but as I got older I really
appreciate what you've done for us educating us so yeah I remember while he's doing setting the
stones in the in the rings had to stand there and read my books you know it was Peter and Jane then
Peter and Jane went down the slide Peter and Jane you know the ladybird books that we don't have
so much now yeah so we're talking a little bit about cultures let's talk a bit about kind of um
he talks about food briefly um what kind of food did you eat yeah we would eat Mauritian food it was
always um but the british version of the morisian food no it would be traditional morisian yeah we
couldn't it was only later on in the years when we had our children that my parents started cooking
things like macaroni cheese or more sort of mingled in british and morisian but when it was just us
it was just typical morisian food all the time maybe I can't remember if I had roasted now I
don't know but it was always morisian food and I love my morisian food so one of the typical
things is rugai which is made of tomato tomato and chili and thyme and because Mauritius was
colonized by the french and the portuguese and the spanish our food isn't typically and because we
came from india so our food is a mix of this of the european mediterranean with the indian
so that was nice and yeah because thyme is not a very indian spice is it no but we use that in
most of our cooking that's interesting time you said tomatoes and chili I think you said thyme
yeah thyme we put in our yeah so we like to grow our thyme to put in the interesting yeah
uh what was some of the best moments from your childhood of being you know being let's say under
the age of 16 are there any kind of really important moments of your childhood that you
really appreciate about your love deeply sure I think just being as a family you know being
having my brothers and sisters and I think what I miss because once everybody leaves the home they
get married have their own life you always miss your your siblings you know you think oh everybody's
got their own life and you've got more responsibilities and it was just nice to be
you know as a family unit everybody together and sometimes it's sort of like um tears family apart
as well like people get a bit of separation um you know there's a downside of me having coming
to here and most of my family leaving them in london um you know my parents not really you know
especially my mother she sort of like thinks oh she's gone to wales you know she doesn't help
so much now because I'm you know I'm not in london so there's this sort of a little bit of resentment
there that I came here and I was very close with my younger sister um and that sort of that
separation affected her so yeah but you know that I think that's what I miss you know that
the family being together we used to have laughs you know and now you sort of like children have
grown up and you're kind of on your own and it's just the family being together is really important
you know the laughter and the culture
um do you think there's anything that made your family do you believe or what do you believe
yeah makes your family unique what makes it unique yeah your family unique um
I suppose your culture isn't it what how you where you come from your culture
because marusia is quite a small place yeah I don't know a lot of marushias no
there's not many here from marusias no I don't think I've ever met a lot of marushias
no I think so may may is from marusias if you haven't you interviewed her yet yeah may she's
on the list oh she hasn't been interviewed I've interviewed her but yeah yeah she's from marusias
but there's not many people here from marusias but when I go to london
and there's a new year celebration and you know like um it's down in a hall I think
but marusias is so small and there's all this marician here what's happened to marusias is
that they won't come here but here in wales there isn't many yeah and I think the music
you know the sega music we have in marusias which is um comes from africa so it's a lot of
african drum beats because how it originated was that oh we were brought over like slaves to
work in marusias from india to come and we were brought over by the british large
and I remember my my grandad you know saying how racist they were then you know even though
marusias was a lot of um indian people there um the british did try to use us like slaves
so um yeah there was that discrimination I've lost my train of thought there you did ask
what makes you unique and you're talking about music yeah the music how it originally yeah it's
called sega so um it's kind of like african beat so because they came from different from this
country treated like slave the african people the black people the um I think they they're the one
that had african beats they drink their ramen coke and their whiskey by the beach because they
were you know had to work so hard then they'd have their music they drink and they just made
music out of you know spoon and the drink bottles they were and just tackled to the beat and then
that's how it developed so that that makes it unique because sega is quite a unique um kind of
dance which is sort of african and indian mix and that's really nice it's sort of quite mixed culture
I feel I'm not to look into that yeah and that's and I think that's what makes marusian people
really unique because you've got um catholics muslims and hindus which make up the majority
of which I am that was I was born into a hindu family but in marusias we all get on
you know they we all help each other you know there's just no barriers we respect each religion
if your neighbor is a muslim or catholic you share things um but when you come here that you can see
division you know like sometimes I sort of because I'm quite proactive in the community
and sometimes I've helped different groups set up um and there was one indian group that I helped
and they thought well I'm a true indian you're marusian and there's still that even though you're
the same religion there's all there's some kind of divide which I didn't feel in marusias forms
yeah okay so your early experiences in the uk you know um
let's move on to your early teens you know before your 20s what was life like going through school
educate formal education yeah how does that like in the uk yeah it was good my dad was always sort
of like pushing for education um I liked education and why I used to always cut me
in top of the class and people used to like sitting next to me and try copying my marks
so um that was nice but what shocked me although I was coming top um I think that the teachers or
somebody had to mark papers and then they said I wasn't good my marks went down and I thought
when I used to be taught I come so I don't know if it was discrimination in the school
um and then um I think 16 17 when we have to leave school um the I remember deputy head
teacher calling me and said oh you're not capable of doing a levels and I was so disheartened
thinking when I used to get taught I used to like my science I was really good with science
and it just sort of like put a downer on things and I think I think I was 16 or something I left
school and then my sister was saying um I said what shall I do all I know my dad does jewellery
maybe I should go and work as a jeweler with him you know you always do what your parents are doing
so I thought my dad's saying oh he says there's little jobs there and I don't know if I really
want to do that um and then my sister said look um just go to college go to college um higher
education and I went to do that um I did fail my English a couple of times coming from Mauritius
so my English I had to do quite a few times and I remember the last time um I was running in I
was really late to do my English exam and the door was just about to shut I said
I need to get in to do my exam and I went in she let open the door let me in sit late and that's
the one I passed the one that I'd nearly shut the door off nearly shut the door off so I passed my
English um I wasn't very good at maths I think is the way my dad taught it as well I thought um
but I did go on to do get on to do my O levels so I got that then I got my A levels I thought oh
on was it up now teacher I did do my A levels and then I went on to do a degree so I did
sociology and psychology um I majored in psychology and I did humanities so I'm always
for humanitarian causes so how about on the social side then growing up how was that like making
friends breaking friends you know I think it was really hard because my parents coming to this
country they didn't trust other people they didn't you know we were in this with people
with different culture they weren't they weren't the same as us so they didn't want us coming they
didn't want them to come to our house and we couldn't go to their house maybe if they were
Mauritian or Caribbean um they can Turkish we had Turkish Greek if they were of ethnic minority then
they felt a bit more um trustworthy towards them because we were going through the same course
so we weren't really allowed friends so it was it was quite lonely because who became my friends
with my brothers and sisters we became friends so if we went to the cinema it was with my sisters
it was like here you go with your friends um so we weren't allowed to go clubbing you know it was
really really straight um yeah my friends were my sisters so that's why we were closed and not to
have that you miss it because they were your friends and then everybody goes in separate ways
get married have their children have their own life but I rebelled against that and I used to go
and see my friends they were my friends um and there was a Mauritian as well and a Caribbean
but the wife friend became my best friend her name was Elaine
so I used to go to her house and my sister said you need to get back home you need to and I
wouldn't listen because I wanted to be with friends so I'd just stay out first but I would
get back home before my parents came yeah so how about um so this is all still in London yeah so
how about then the first move to Wales when you first saw Wales what was it like yeah so when I
came to Wales I felt more at home because I remember when I was in London I'd always be
drawing mountains rivers palm trees so when I came to Wales and I saw nature I stopped drawing
that because I felt more at home I saw rivers I saw mountains um so I felt more at home in Wales
and I didn't like it at first again it did look grey and it was raining a lot so that put me off
but once I got to know Wales and I saw more of the nature I really started liking and felt more at
home and the kind of work that I did I worked with national parks so taking people out to the
Brecon's it was working with ethnic minorities and I remember that especially the Bangladesh
ladies say oh this is like home thanks for taking us here it feels like we feel we're like at home
so people really like nature so try and get as many people into national parks and countryside
yeah so that was nice coming into Wales what does Wales mean to you
I saw a lot of poverty in Wales compared to London you know um more there seemed to be more like a
community people really wanted to work towards a common goal and when I first started doing
community work I used to see the same faces the same proactive people doing the work
and that's widened you know but we're always we still have to we still gravitate towards
black and ethnic minorities and when we go and look when I go and look for work
um you know you don't get into mainstream you're always looking for work for as a bme worker
and we shouldn't have to do that um and I remember somebody saying oh you'll never get a job in the
council and I thought they're talking about becoming from London you know they take on people and
yeah it was true you try to get into a council job and you couldn't you couldn't get a job so I
thought I'll give up with the council and just go towards them working carrying on working with
bme groups but I um so I did I've done a lot because I I was I had my two girls um and I've
seen what it you know like children um whose parents went to work that they felt you know like
what's the point of having children if you can't be there with them so um when I studied psychology
I did child deprivation um so for me I didn't want to be uh going to work I wanted to be a
mother who stayed at home be there for my children so I gave up my career to stay at home I did um
help my husband you know doing construction work so that I could be around the children
so that was really important for me just to be to be there for them and so the community work I do
is sort of like um really tailored around around the children so when I did the national park work
um I initiated that we take single parents who can't access to go out people like myself you know
we sort of like got children but we can't drive and we needed access to get to places so um I did
a lot of work around parents and children and whatever I did was tailored tailored around around
my children sounds like you've tried to find a work balance yeah yeah that's fair enough
what have you done what do you feel you've done to maintain links to your culture and your motherland
do you feel you have yeah I always sort of um I remember when I first came here um the school
sort of said you know can you do a Diwali celebration talk about Diwali so because there
wasn't many Hindus when we came I think we were the only one one I think we're the only one actually
in the school where Pri and Sarita went and Cliver so they told me to come in and give a talk
and got the teachers to wear sari and I discussed and the children were really interested
so that that was really nice so I sort of did little things like that and you know school might
call me in and say come and give a Diwali talk um Raquel who's also in the age alive she'd do
something around culture and I remember we did something about wearing um saris or whatever we
would wear in our culture so we did like a fashion show so I always maintained links with BME
activities that related to similar culture as mine you know with Indian food or music that sort
of thing so yeah I always felt comfortable but now it seems to be less than what we had before
I don't think we're not there's as much of that cultural
things that we did before like events it's really died down
and I think you just go through the process um and I think that's getting diluted with our children
as well you know like you want to keep maintain the culture some of them are growing apart from
me you know their friends are more mixed um there's interracial marriages and that sort
of thing going on so everybody's becoming more mixed whereas our generation we really wanted to
maintain so tell me about uh yeah the kind of food maritian food that you still talk about
the kind of food you still eat today oh right so cook maritian food is there you do have a favorite
dish do you have a favorite ingredient yes um well I would say ragai is one of them we cook ragai
but now it's sort of more um a mix of of the food because there's so many um
food out there there's so many cookery programming you want to try chinese food you want to try
thai so I think it's more world food now you know unless um I go back home or you know then
this gets back traditional again but once I'm here I'm finding it's more sort of um different types of
different types of food yeah you say about going back home do you going back home in in london
where my mum is and uh when we get together as a family again it's always maritian food
um I think it's getting the time here as well you know and um when you're cooking your own kind of
food it's having the time like we have things that it's called gato pima it's made out of lentils
so you need to grind it you've got soak it um you know all that kind of thing then fry it's a bit
like falafel so it's it's the time yeah especially with the children not being there you're on your
own you know just don't just keep it simple and um unless there's a family thing then it's back to
the maritian food at weddings and things like that so how about for other areas of tradition
how about like spiritual practice and and um clothing do you do you do you look at using any
of those things anymore at all I think um living in ways you do and there's not many maritians or
many hindus um to to be able to wear that or go to weddings and things like that so I don't
it's sort of like staying in the cupboard at the moment but um recently um my uncle who's
who's an indian priest um he's also my godfather um he's opened up a mandir which is like a temple
here in newport and he opened that up in march so I've started going to that now and that's really
nice because um you can start wearing some traditional clothes um and on saturday we're
going to do a black galba dance so there's going to be traditional music from our culture um and
it's uh his guyanese um and we're maritian so there's a lot of guyanese people maritian people
who are hindus that come from bristol and london and birmingham and even from here the indians the
gurdwari they all come together and it's really colorful it's really nice so it does that once
a month so I'm quite starting to do that now but usually um with hindus we just pray at home
our own spirituality we do meditation that's what I do anyway I do meditation and I'll just do my
um prayer at home I've got a little book which is the Hanuman Jalisa he's supposed to be you know
like um praying um making impossible possible powerful um so and it's quite complex hinduism
because people believe we have many gods which we don't um a manifestation of our own being
of the personalities we have we have all these different personalities
and what hinduism did was that um to make people um understand or relate to something
they provided a manifestation of um you know if you were not feeling well you pray to this sort of
this sort of goddess to help you so you can relate to something because nobody knows what god is or
who god is what does god look like so they had to sort of like give them some sort of visual thing
to make it easier for them so it's not that there are many gods it's only one god we don't know you
know it's just one god that everybody prays to in different ways and what I quite like about hinduism
spirituality I can go to church I can go to the mosque god is there you know there's no
distinct I can go anywhere so as far as anything no that's cool that sounds great I mean as part
of this project the people's collection is a digital online collection uh which I think is
funded for 50 years so that's definitely existing for at least another 50 years say um but being
digital has access and ability to aggregate different types of material whether it's video
audio transcription do you have any heirlooms or mementos you would like to add to possible
that could be passports they could be old photographs it could be old uh letters it could be
anything that you feel you'd want to add to tell the story of the niche so there would be things
like photographs really it's totally up to you it's just a way of you the medium is digital
and the people's collection allows us to do high quality scans restoration
video capturing that's part of the service they offer with cameras
if there is anything would you like to add anything should I put a yes against your name
I think photos are really good they are I think they always are and I was saying
well artifacts and things like that I was saying to the ladies earlier on was actually sadly
some of the most cherished things end up in a box within a box in a cupboard in a
whatever right and they don't come out till it's a bit too late and I always feel that's kind of
part of the issue sometimes in protecting these stories is actually sometimes we need to bring
these out to the fore and you know share them pass them on to generation do actively rather than
after the fact so I think that's what this project is quite interesting is actually people bring out
the old photographs which they have not seen in 20 30 years um and also because of the nature of
the digital medium is the digital file will last longer than the photograph yeah when you think
about it like that is your photograph gelatin prints will last you know if if kept from an airtight
space with no water and no salt that could last for many years but sadly with a bit of salt a
bit of water a bit dampness they just fall apart and a digital file will actually last longer in
that sense so I think it is going that way like you know we've got um this instagram and facebook
and the younger generation look like my children will take this whole they like this photo I want
to show it to my children so it's quite nice that they sort of like looking at older pictures taking
that picture and saying we're going to pass this on so it's kind of starting with them already the
younger generation wanting to restore that so yeah doing more of that um it's definitely good
I'll put I'll put yes against you in England yeah so what will happen is once we've done this
I'll contact you again I'll talk about hey would you like to submit anything yeah and you can come
in you have it professionally scanned etc and they'll go through the process yeah it's good for the
yeah the next generation to see where they came from their grandparents because my even my my
oldest granddaughter she's asking you know about grandparents haven't seen them because I was
since covid not traveling much and not seeing
great-grandparents so yeah they do question it so those that's the bulk of my my story questions
I'm just going to go into the realm of age alive really what's age alive meant to you
age alive has been it's been a like a good friendship group you know we've all bonded
um we all come together we enjoy each other's company because as we get older our children
grow up they don't get time to come and see us um and they say you know a bit of babysitting
for the grandchildren and hey mom where are you we need someone to look after the children but
you know I love it I love to be around my grandchildren so I do I just sort of like give
up you know somebody says oh come and do this or whatever so I've got to look after my granddaughter
oh the grandchildren so yeah family is really important to me but having this age alive like
a friendship group you know it's really nice we all come together a lot of the time we're on our
own and we just want a break we want something social so it's just nice to come and talk to
others and have an activity and have a laugh so yeah that's really good that Roy
you know has has maintained to make sure we will get on we will look after each other
so he's been really the rock behind it and the good committee that helps him
we're all really you know supportive if something happens on somebody's birthday they you know
we'll send out birthday messages and everybody feel you know oh they've been remembered
and been cherished and yes that's really nice and you know you get to know people
sometimes you come you don't you don't really know people and then sometimes you might go on a day
trip and as you walk we do walks and things you get to know people more and more it's just like
you know we know snippets but we don't know everything still so that bond and that friendship
grows stronger as we get to know each other and just accepting people you know for me is just
accepting people as they are everybody's got different personalities some might be awkward
some might go on and on and you just think okay let it be you know that's the way they are
you have quite a background in human humanitarian support and your studies have shown you know like a
social and psychological development is there a does bhanesh have principles you would like
to pass on to future generations does she have a message a message in 50 years when comes along
he's researching people from marishes marishan marisha marishes marishes is someone from marisha
marishes marishian marishian marishian is marisha is from marisius yeah so someone's researching
about the community of marishian marishian people marishian people people that have lived in wales
and they found oh my god this lady called bhanesh yeah what's what's what's uh what's her philosophy
what's my philosophy um about marishian people what's your message to the future what's my
message to the future i always think um tread carefully in this life you know you have to
tread carefully treat people with kindness and give and help where you can because it comes back
to you you know you've been kind you've been helpful yeah just have to tread carefully because
you might treat somebody bad um next time you might be treated badly as well but you might need
that person in the future or that person might need you so you always just have to be kind to
everybody is that was that principle of karma is that how it works yeah yeah it is yeah like karma
yeah so um if you treat um somebody badly then it's likely to come back to you so always be
be kind and giving and it's good for it's good you find the psychology of being helpful in giving
it helps you as well you feel good you know you feel good by giving to others and helping others
any final messages from bhanesh any final messages from bhanesh
um enjoy life as much as you can you know just um yeah enjoy life treat people well
make good friendships um have harmony in your relationship you know that's the thing and
you know not to um aggravate people and although we can we do do that you know because everybody's
diverse but um we've just got to do our bit we've got to do our bit cool thank you very much
you know we've got good values and virtues in life you know being compassionate being kind
all that kind of thing
thank you very much i think i'm done yeah i've gotten all these questions
that's it thank you very much
okay